[Documentation Code Camp] - Added introductory section for queue documentation - Part 1 (#889)
mxcube/mxcubecore: docs/source/dev/queue.md

> ## Introduction
> 
> Today's MXCuBE queue system was first implemented in version 2.x of MXCuBE. The aim was to create a queuing system that provided means for automation and that integrated well with the sample changer robots, the ISPyB LIMS system, and workflow engines. The queue was designed to have manual and automatic modes of operation.

Reviewer: We are missing a title

```suggestion
# Queue system

## Introduction

Today's MXCuBE queue system was first implemented in version 2.x of MXCuBE. The aim was to create a queuing system that provided means for automation and that integrated well with the sample changer robots, the ISPyB LIMS system, and workflow engines. The queue was designed to have manual and automatic modes of operation.
```

# Queue system
Today's MXCuBE queue system was first implemented in version 2.x of MXCuBE. The aim was to create a queuing system that provided means for automation and that integrated well with the sample changer robots, the ISPyB LIMS system, and workflow engines. The queue was designed to have manual and automatic modes of operation.

> To enable automatic data collection over several samples, one needs to associate tasks to be performed on a set of samples. The decision was to represent the queue as a tree of nodes, where each node defines the logic for a certain task or collection protocol. Each node can have a set of child nodes that are executed after the main logic of its parent. A sample node, for example, defines how a sample is mounted, and its child nodes define what is done on that sample once it is mounted.

Reviewer 2: I feel it's a bit confusing to describe the entire queue as a tree of nodes that contains sample nodes and task nodes. From what I understand, there's basically a flat queue of sample "entries" at the top, and each sample entry is associated with a tree of task "nodes", right?

Author: No, its a tree !

Author: Its made to look flatter than it really is on the web UI side

Reviewer 2: :exploding_head: but then is it a tree of "sample entries" and each entry has its own tree of "task nodes", or are sample nodes and task nodes truly mingled with one another inside the same tree?

Author: Ill make a figure and maybe it makes things easier to understand, I never tried to put a Sample node on a Group node, but that could actually work (not that it makes alot of sense)

Basically:

- Root
   - Sample 1
     - Group 1
       - Task 1
       - Task 2
       - ....
     - ...
     - Group N
       - Task 1
       - Task 2
  - Sample 2
    -  ...
  - Sample N

Author: In the Qt version the queue is both displayed and executed like this

Author: In the web version the Group nodes are not displayed and the queue is displayed one sample at the time, but that is an illusion. When we run the queue in automatic mode, the above is what gets executed

Author: When we run it sample by sample we explicitly disable all entries except for the entry we want to execute the queue. This is very explicit in the Qt version because each item can be enabled and disabled by a checkbox in the web version this was made implicit. The later was a wish from the scientists  because the prior was considered to be to complicated and confusing when there were lots of samples.

Author: Maybe it helps, but Ill try to clarify and make a diagram

Reviewer 2: Nice, thanks, it does clear things up a lot!

> I never tried to put a Sample node on a Group node, but that could actually work (not that it makes alot of sense)

I guess this is my point: the fact that it's a very flexible tree structure under the hood does not necessarily need to be documented. If the recommended/actual usage of the queue is that samples are always directly under the root of the tree, then the explanations and terminology can be dumbed down a lot (and arguably the code as well, but that's another debate).

Author: It was designed flexible on purpose  to make it easy to extend/adapt. There were lots of ideas regarding automation at the time (and there still is) so we needed to be quite flexible and did not want to risk coming up with a system that did not fit what the scientists possibly wanted to do in the future.

The implementation as it is today can be simplified without loosing functionality, and that is partially also what we want to do with the refactoring of the queue that we speak about sometimes. The queue could be implemented in many different ways, it can be a completely flat structure but then there has to be something else that defines the relation between the "entries". 

I understand what you mean, somehow I prefer to document as it really is as its for developers and then perhaps add a additional explanations on what simplifications that are or can be done.

The queue system and node, mentioned above, can be seen as having two conceptual parts: a logic part and a model part. The logic part consists of an object called `QueueManager` and objects are often referred to as *queue entries*. Queue entry objects are simply objects inheriting `BaseQueueEntry`, for instance `DataCollectionQueueEntry`. The queue entry objects define the behavior (logic) of a specific collection protocol. The queue consists of several queue entry objects that are executed via the `QueueManager`.

The model consists of an object called `QueueModel` that has a tree structure of `TaskNode` objects. The `TaskNode` object is often referred to as a *queue model object* and defines the data associated with a collection protocol. There is a one-to-one mapping between a specific queue model object and a specific queue entry, for example, `DataCollectionTaskNode` and `DataCollectionQueueEntry`. The mapping is defined in a structure called MODEL_QUEUE_ENTRY_MAPPINGS in mxcubecore/queue_entry/base_queue_entry.py.

> The combination of a `QueueEntry` and its model (`QueueModel`) is often referred to as an ask *task*, and makes up the entity that will be executed when the queue is executed.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
The combination of a `QueueEntry` and its model (`QueueModel`) is often referred to as a *task*, and makes up the entity that will be executed when the queue is executed.
```

The one-to-one mapping makes it possible to represent a queue and construct the queue entries from the queue model objects. In this way, the tree of queue model objects defines the queue. A task or collection protocol can be added to the queue by adding the *queue model object* to the `QueueModel`. For instance, a rotational data collection is added to the queue by adding a `DataCollectionTaskNode` to the `QueueModel`. This method of adding tasks to the queue is used by the Workflow engines, while the interfaces directly attach a `QueueModel` to the corresponding `QueueEntry` which is then

> *enqueued*

Reviewer 2: Yeah ... I'm lost :sweat_smile: — a small diagram would probably be worth a thousand words. :joy:

Reviewer: I also like diagrams! : D

In case it helps... We can enable [graphviz](https://www.sphinx-doc.org/en/master/usage/extensions/graphviz.html) if not enabled yet.

There are probably other extensions out there:
* <https://github.com/sphinx-contrib/>
* <https://github.com/yoloseem/awesome-sphinxdoc>
* <https://sphinx-extensions.readthedocs.io>

Author: Hm, I think Id prefer to create the diagram myself in this case but perhaps for other things

Reviewer 2: I know of [mermaid](https://mermaid.js.org/intro/) (looks like it's Node-based, though)

Reviewer: Yes, that is mermaid and plantuml that I had in mind (rather than graphviz, even though it works fine for simple things). The good thing is that we directly have the diagram as code inside the document (inside the Markdown or ReStructuredText). I opened a ticket <https://github.com/mxcube/mxcubecore/issues/908> to gather the info, in case someone ever wants/needs to do a diagram this way.

Author: Aha, okey you mean like that. I thought that you meant that the diagram would generated from the source. In that case its much more useful ... to have the code inside the document :)

Reviewer 2: Thanks for the diagram!

## Task creation - creation of QueueEntry and QueueModel
A task is created by creating a `QueueModel` and  attaching it to a corresponding `QueueEntry`. The `QueueEntry` is added or *enqueued* to the queue via the method `QueueManager.enqueue`.

### Differences between the Web and the Qt user interfaces
When the Web interface was designed, the scientists wanted to change some aspects of how the queue operates and how it is presented to the user. The decision was to work on one sample at a time, rather than for the entire queue, as is done in the Qt version. This also means  that the Web interface is centered around displaying the contents of the queue for one sample. It was also decided to not display `DataCollectionGroupQueueEntry` in the queue. The `DataCollectionGroupQueueEntry` still exists in the Web interface, but there is no view created for it.

> On a technical level, there is a tight coupling between the `QueueEntry` base class to a Qt view object that makes the creation of the object slightly different between the two user interfaces (Qt and Web). To handle the tight coupling to Qt a `Mock` object used in the Web version instead of a Qt view and the handling of the updating of the view in the web version handled through signals passed over websockets to the client.

Reviewer 3: To handle the tight coupling to Qt a `Mock` object used in the Web version instead of a Qt view and the handling of the updating of the view in the web version handled through signals passed over websockets to the client.

This sentence might be better if split in two????? So the Web has a Mock object to mimic the Qt?

Author: Yes, you are right. That sentence is a a bit convoluted

Author: > "This sentence might be better if split in two????? So the Web has a Mock object to mimic the Qt?"

Yes

### Creation of QueueEntry and QueueModel
A simple example of the creation of a task: data collection is added to a group, which in turn is added to a sample.
```
# View is either a Qt view or a Mock object
view = Mock()

# The sample_model and sample_entry belong to the sample to which
# we would like to add the task.
# sample_model, sample_entry

> # In the Qt verison this item is displayed in the queue while its
> # not displayed at all in the Web version

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
# In the Qt version, this item is displayed in the queue.
# In the Web version, it's not displayed at all.
```

```{figure} /assets/queue_overview_node_concept.svg
:scale: 30%
:alt: Queue overview node concept

The queue is a tree of nodes, where each node defines the logic for a certain task or collection protocol.
```

The execution order is depth first, so that all the children of a node are executed before the node's siblings. Each node has a `execute` method that defines its main logic and `pre_execute`and `post_execute` methods that are executed before and after the main `execute` method.

This design was thought to map well to the semantics of how data is collected with a sample changer and the upload of metadata to LIMS. The sample changer has a number of samples, each having a set of data collections (child nodes). The results are uploaded to the lims system after each data collection, (`post_execute`). Workflow engines can further group native collection protocols into grouping nodes, which in turn can be used as building blocks for even more complex collection strategies.

> ```{figure} /assets/queue_execute_methods.svg

Reviewer: This file is missing

Author: Thanks, I'm aware, I'm still working on it. Also trying to get the scaling to work

To enable automatic data collection over several samples, there is a need to associate a set of tasks to be performed on the given samples. The decision was to represent the queue as a tree of nodes, where each node defines the logic for a certain task or collection protocol. Each node can have a set of child nodes that are executed after the main logic of its parent. There are no constraints on the structure of the tree, to not limit the possibilities for more complex collection protocols. The nesting and reuse of the various types of nodes can be done freely. For conventional collections with a sample changer containing pins with samples. A sample node, for example, defines how a sample is mounted, and its child nodes define what is done on that sample once it is mounted.

```{figure} /assets/queue_overview_node_concept.svg
:width: 400
:alt: Queue overview node concept

*Typical structure of a queue for conventional colletions with sample changer containing pins with samples.*
```

**_NOTE:_** There are no constraints on the structure of the tree. However, today: the top level always contains sample nodes,

> and the nesting occurs at the group level. The depth of nesting is currently maximum 3 - Sample -

Reviewer 4: That is not actually the case for GPhL workflow - we nest more deeply. Maybe we should change that. This probably needs discussion, to make sure that everybody either is or is not ready for deeper nesting.

Author: That's not an issue, If you know how many levels you nest Ill update with that figure or phrase it like "the most common nesting depth is 3" or similar

Author: So, I added a "disclaimer" for workflows, but let me know if you rather that we add a figure.

*enqueued*

## Task creation - creation of QueueEntry and QueueModel
A task is created by creating a `Tasknode` and  attaching it to a corresponding `QueueEntry`. The `QueueEntry` is added or *enqueued* to the queue via the method `QueueManager.enqueue`.

### Creation of QueueEntry and QueueModel
A simple example of the creation of a task: data collection is added to a group, which in turn is added to a sample.
```
# View is either a Qt view or a Mock object
view = Mock()

# The sample_model and sample_entry belong to the sample to which
# we would like to add the task.
# sample_model, sample_entry

# In the Qt verison this item is displayed in the queue while its
# not displayed at all in the Web version
group_model = qmo.TaskGroup()
group_entry = qe.TaskGroupQueueEntry(view, group_model)

dc_model = qmo.DataCollection()
dc_entry = qe.DataCollectionQueueEntry(view, dc_model)

HWR.beamline.queue_model.add_child(sample_model, group_model)
HWR.beamline.queue_model.add_child(group_model, dc_model)

sample_entry.enqueue(group_entry)
group_entry.enqueue(dc_entry)
```

> Each type of data collection protocol has a piece of code similar to the code above associated with it. In the Web version, this is done in mxcubeweb.components.queue.py in the methods called add_**task_type**, for instance `add_data_collection`. In the Qt version, the creation is done in two different places: first in the widget where the queue model object is created, and then through `QueueModel.view_created`.

Reviewer 4: I think we should say explicitly that in the Qt version enqueueing the queue entry is done automatically when the qmo is added to the queue, via the QueueModel.add_child function, which sends out a child_added signal. It seems - to a *very* quick look - that the same is the case in the web version, via the function components.queue.Queue.queue_model_child_added. Maybe this should have a more prominent place in thedocumentation. Actually, is it the rule or an exception when enqueue is called explicitly rather than via signal?

Author: Its not entirely correct for the web version because its only the case for collections added through workflows that use the signal, the rest is done through `enqueue`. Ill see what I can do

Author: Thanks, I tried to make clarify a bit, let me know what you think ?
